Programming Assignment VI
Extended Abstract
Branden Wagner, CSCI-C202
07/29/15
 
  In this program we explored the functions of JavaFX and lambda expressions in graphical display and event-driven programming.  The program displays two circles with equal radii, and a line which connects their two centers which is labelled with the distance (in pixels) between them.  Additionally, the user may move either of the circles to any position within the pane and the endpoint of the line will follow with a continually updated distance label.
  JavaFX is a recently released software platform for creation and execution of Graphical User Interface (GUI) applications, and is a replacement for Java’s Swing platform.  It is notable for being completely independent of Operating System components to run applications.
  When creating a program under JavaFX, there are several layers of objects which determine the final presentation of the application.  Manipulation of each of these layers allowed us to display all the necessary objects, but some additional steps were required to handle the user’s manipulation of the circles.
  To handle the events generated by the user we made use of Java’s implementation of lambda expressions, which are only supported in Java 8, which released in 2014. Lambda expressions are a concept borrowed from functional programming, where program implementation is more often done with expressions. These expressions are immutable or fixed- state upon creation, and require the use of effectively final objects in Java.  
  As a user interacts with the application, events are generated.  We can use these events to alter the properties of objects to change their position and to calculate a new set of attributes or data.  Lambda expressions allow for direct handling of events which only affect specific objects.
  We found that the creation of this program was simplified by JavaFX and lambda expressions.  These powerful tools allow for the creation of dynamic and user-friendly programs.
	
 
Output
 
Figure 1. Initial State.




 
Figure 2.  Movement of Circles.
 
Figure 3. Limit of Movement to Panel Size.




 
Figure 4.  Limits Recalculate on Resizing of Pane.
